Hello.
I'd like to thank you all
for coming this afternoon.
This is a very exciting
session to be involved in.
And it's actually one of
three sessions to do with
Mac OS X support for audio and MIDI.
This session will cover both the
MIDI support the we're providing in
OS X-- and it's the first time in a
number of years that Apple has made
a serious commitment in this area.
And as I said, it's very exciting to be
involved in this project.
There's two more sessions on Friday.
They're late in the afternoon,
starting at 3:30, covering both the
I/O Kit area of audio support,
audio device support,
and the user application
interface to audio devices.
I'd encourage you to go to that.
And then after those sessions on Friday,
there'll actually be a party that we'll
give you some more details on later.
So without any further ado,
I'd like to introduce Doug White,
who will be talking about
the MIDI services on OS X.
Thank you.
Good afternoon.
I'm Doug Wyatt.
I'm a software engineer
in the Core Audio Group,
and I'm here to tell you about the
new MIDI system services on Mac OS X.
Before coming to Apple,
I worked at AppCode
Systems for about 12 years,
working on MIDI applications
like many of you.
And I was the author of OMS there.
So here's what I'm going
to talk about today.
I'm going to talk a little
about the history and the goals
of our new system services,
the history of MIDI on the Macintosh,
because that will help
you understand our goals.
I'll go over some of the key
concepts in the MIDI API.
We'll look at some of
the functions in it.
I'll talk a little about the
performance challenges of getting
MIDI working on a multitasking,
modern operating system like OS X.
And I'll tell you about the availability
of the new MIDI system services.
So going back to the mid-1980s,
the first Macintosh MIDI interfaces
connected directly to the serial hardware
and developers would write
to the serial ports directly
because it was most efficient,
and I don't think the serial drivers
supported external clock in those days.
And that was fine and good for a while,
until the late '80s we started
to see multiport MIDI interfaces,
like Mark of the
Unicorn's MIDI Timepiece.
We started to see sound cards,
like Digidesign's
Mac Proteus and SampleCell.
And there started--there became a need
for system software for applications
to deal with these different kinds of
hardware in a hardware-independent way.
So in 1989, we saw Apple's MIDI Manager,
which was the first attempt
to solve this problem.
Unfortunately, MIDI Manager had some
performance problems,
and it got kind of unwieldy
when you tried to use it in
large studio environments.
Opcode's OMS, which came out in 1990,
addressed some of these
limitations of MIDI Manager.
And in the course of a few years,
it became a de facto standard.
Most programs on the Macintosh
are now supported on OS 9.
People making MIDI hardware tend to
write OMS drivers for their hardware,
and it's the way -- it's the only way
that a lot of these applications and
hardware are talking to each other now.
But because OMS was
controlled by a competitor,
and now that it isn't
being supported anymore,
as far as I can tell -- well,
it continues to work on OS 9,
but it's not being developed any further,
and the prospects for it to
work well on OS 10 are not good.
So that combined with the fact
that developers have been sort of
chipping away at MIDI compatibility
with the problem of SUFs,
Wiresense, and so on,
we see a need for Apple to
provide a single set of
MIDI system services for OS X.
So that's our main goal on OS X,
to provide a single standard so that
everyone's hardware and software
can play together nicely again.
So in support of that goal,
we want to focus just on
those basic MIDI I/O services,
and doing those basic MIDI I/O services
with highly accurate timing,
meaning low latencies and low jitter.
Also, we want to make the MIDI services
open source so that you,
as developers, can see what we're doing,
help us fix things if
we're not doing them right,
and not have to be afraid of repeats
of the fates of MIDI Manager and OMS.
So looking at the MIDI system services
in the big picture of the rest of the OS,
they're layered above the
I/O Kit in the kernel.
I/O Kit is where we see drivers
for talking to hardware.
We have a concept of MIDI drivers.
Applications can talk
to the MIDI services,
which in turn talk to MIDI drivers.
For higher-level applications of MIDI,
like just playing MIDI files,
you can use the
QuickTime MusicDevice APIs,
and Chris Rogers will be telling you a
bit about that in the second half of the
So here are the main pieces
of the new MIDI services.
We have a driver model for MIDI drivers.
Applications can share
access to hardware,
meaning that multiple
MIDI applications can send
simultaneously to the same device,
and a MIDI device can send
MIDI into the computer and multiple
applications can all receive it.
We timestamp all the MIDI input.
We schedule all MIDI output in advance
for applications that want to do that.
And all that scheduling is
done using the most accurate
timing hardware on the computer,
the host clock as returned by uptime.
The MIDI services provide a small
central repository of information
about the MIDI hardware that's present.
They don't try to replicate
the full functionality that
you see in OMS and FreeMIDI,
where the user with 15 synthesizers
can enter information about all that.
When I say there's a repository
of device information,
that's just about the
actual MIDI interfaces and
cards that are present.
We don't, at least for now,
become concerned about the
devices that are attached
externally to MIDI interfaces.
And the MIDI services provide some
basic inter-process communication.
So if you have a small MIDI utility,
maybe it transposes or
arpeggiates or something,
you can use the MIDI services to
create an application like this.
like that.
So now I'd like to get into some of the
objects and functions in the MIDI API.
First, there's the MIDI client.
And for those of you who've
used MIDI Manager in OMS,
this is a familiar concept.
The first thing you typically do
is create a MIDI client object.
And that's done with MIDI client create.
After creating your client,
then you can create MIDI port objects.
This is also similar to
MIDI Manager and OMS.
MIDI ports are objects through
which your program can send
and receive MIDI messages,
and they're created at startup.
So here we see MIDI input port
create and MIDI output port create.
which create input and output ports,
obviously.
The my_readproc parameter that's
passed to my_midi_input_port_create
is a procedure through which that port
will -- let me rephrase that -- that
procedure will get called when MIDI comes
into your program through that port.
All of the MIDI I/O functions
use the structure MIDI Packet
List when sending and receiving MIDI.
It's simply a list of
MIDI packet structures.
It can be any length for now.
And those MIDI packet structures are
themselves variable length structures.
A MIDI packet contains one or
more simultaneous MIDI events.
With one exception,
if you have a system-exclusive message,
it has to be in its own MIDI packet,
and the reason for that is just to
make our own internal parsing simpler.
And for similar reasons,
running status is not
allowed inside a MIDI packet.
But otherwise, the data array portion of
the MIDI packet is a little
MIDI stream directed at one device.
and MIDI packets are time-stamped,
and I'll talk a bit about that later.
So dealing with variable-length
structures like MIDI packet
and MIDI packet list can
be a little annoying,
so we've provided a few
simple helper functions.
There's nextMIDIPacket,
which you can use when dealing
with the MIDI packet list.
You can get a pointer to the
first packet in the packet list,
then use nextMIDIPacket to
advance to the next one,
and so on.
When sending MIDI,
you can use MIDI packet list init and
MIDI packet list add to dynamically
build up a MIDI packet list.
And here's an example of using them.
Here, I'm creating a buffer of
1k bytes on the stack.
I'm casting it to a MIDI packet list.
I call MIDI packet list
init on it to initialize it.
And then I'm adding a simple MIDI note
on event to it with MIDI packet list add.
And if this were a more complex example,
then I could go adding more events
to be played at different times
and build up a MIDI packet list.
When MIDI packet list add returns null,
then I know that it's become
full and it's time to send it.
And I can call MIDI packet
list init and start calling
MIDI packet list add on it again.
Okay,
now that we've looked at the structures
representing MIDI data itself,
here are the objects that
represent MIDI sources and
destinations in the system.
The lowest-level object
is a MIDI endpoint,
which is a simple
MIDI source or destination,
and a single 16-channel MIDI stream.
So your program can have one
simple view of the system as an
array of sources and destinations.
And here's an example of finding all
the destinations in the system and
sending a MIDI packet to each one.
MIDI Get Number of Destinations and
MIDI Get Destination are used to
walk through all the destinations.
And then MIDI Send
takes as its first
argument an output port,
which you created at startup,
the destination, which was just returned
from MIDI Get Destination,
and then a MIDI packet list.
So in this example,
we're sending the same MIDI packet
list to all of the destinations.
Similarly, here's an example of how
to find and receive all the
MIDI sources in the system.
Find and open input connections to
all of the MIDI sources in the system.
We call MIDI_GET_NUMBER_OF_SOURCES and
MIDI_GET_SOURCE to walk
through all of the sources.
And then we call
MIDI_PORT_CONNECT_SOURCE to establish
a connection from that MIDI source
to your program's input port.
Now the reason we ask you to
create such connections explicitly,
and this concept is familiar to
those of you who've used OMS,
is so that if you've got a
bunch of MIDI sources sending
stuff into the computer,
we only incur the overhead of
delivering that MIDI to your application
when it's from a source that your
application cares about listening to.
And if you remember,
when we created that input port
at the beginning of the program,
we passed myReadProc,
and it gets called when
that MIDI comes in.
A note about the ReadProc.
The MIDI library creates a thread on your
program's behalf to receive that data.
So similarly to the way on Mac OS 9,
for those of you who've done
MIDI programming there before,
your MIDI would come in at
interrupt level and you'd have
to be careful about critical
regions and not accessing memory.
On OS X,
you need to be aware that your read
proc is called from a separate thread,
and you may have synchronization
issues with any data you
access from that thread.
And also be aware it's
a high-priority thread.
Don't do too much work there.
Okay, so those are MIDI sources
and destinations.
The next higher-level object
in the MIDI API is MIDI Entity,
which is a logical subcomponent
of a device which groups together
some number of endpoints.
For example,
you might have a USB device which
has a general MIDI synthesizer
in it and a pair of MIDI ports.
That device can be thought
of as having two entities:
the synthesizer and
the pair of MIDI jacks.
An eight-port MIDI interface with
eight ins and eight outs might be
thought of as having eight entities,
each of them with a source
and a destination endpoint.
The reason we have this concept of an
entity is so that if your program wants
to communicate in a bidirectional manner
with some piece of hardware out there,
you have a way of associating
the sources and destinations.
You know, which ones constitute a pair.
The next level up in the
MIDI API is a MIDI device,
which represents an
actual physical device,
like a MIDI interface, a card,
something that sits on FireWire.
It's something that's
controlled by a driver.
The driver for that device
will have located it and
registered it with the system.
And so this diagram here
illustrates how MIDI devices contain
entities which contain endpoints.
And so here's a quick look at the
functions you would use to walk
through the system and locate the
devices and entities that are present.
MIDI GetNumberOfDevices
and MIDI GetDevice will
iterate through the devices,
and MIDI GetNumberOfEntities
and MIDI GetEntity will walk
through the entities that are
associated with the device.
Okay, now we've looked at devices,
entities, and endpoints.
There's a set of calls to find out
information about those devices,
entities, and endpoints,
and we call these attributes
"properties." The property
system is extensible,
meaning that anyone can make up a
property to attach to their device,
but we've defined a few simple ones,
like its name, its manufacturer name,
its model number,
the MIDI channels that it's listening on,
if someone knows that.
So the system is extensible.
Properties can be inherited,
which means that if you ask, for example,
an endpoint,
"What is your manufacturer name?"
we'll probably end up with the
device's manufacturer name,
because the driver/writer
will probably have just said,
"Here's my device.
I'm the ABC Corporation,
and here's my D4 device." And, you know,
he's just attached that to the device,
but the entity will inherit
that property from the device.
And as I said, for now,
properties are most likely only
going to be set by drivers.
Here's a simple example of
obtaining a property of an object.
We use the MIDI object
getStringProperty call,
pass the constant kMIDIPROPERTY name,
and we get back a CFString,
which is the name.
We can convert it to a C string,
print it, and then release the
CFStringRef that we got back.
CFStringRef is part of core foundation,
which you can read about
in our documentation.
Okay, the highest-level object in
the MIDI API is the MIDI setup,
which represents a saved or
saveable state of the system.
It's essentially just a list of
the devices the drivers locate,
the MIDI interfaces and
cards that are present.
But we do have facilities there for
keeping track of some other details,
like which driver's device
owns the serial port,
which device does the user prefer
for playing back general MIDI files,
or whatever.
Here are some examples of how your
program can manipulate MIDI setups.
Those of you who've used OMS might
be afraid of the term "setup"
because there was that OMS setup
program that not everyone liked.
But we don't have any user
interface involved here,
although at worst I could envision
a dialog where the user has to
authorize serial ports to be searched.
But in any case,
I don't think we're going to
have any user interface here.
MIDI setup create simply tells the
system to go interrogate all the drivers,
find out what hardware is present,
make a MIDI setup containing
all those devices,
and return it.
Then you would almost always
call MIDI setup install after
calling MIDI setup create,
which just tells the system,
"Here's the MIDI setup.
Make that the current state until
someone else tells you otherwise."
MIDI Setup Get Current returns a
reference to the current MIDI setup.
And then there's MIDI Setup
To Data and MIDI Setup From Data,
which allow you to convert
a MIDI setup object to and
from a textual representation,
which is in XML,
and can be saved to a file.
Okay,
so that's a tour of some of the objects
to which you send and receive MIDI.
Now I'd like to talk about some
of the issues of timing when
sending MIDI and receiving it.
Your programs will probably
want to schedule MIDI output
a little bit in advance,
and you can do that by using timestamps.
The timestamps in the MIDI packets
we looked at earlier use the host
clock time as returned by uptime.
We suggest that you don't schedule
events too far in advance.
If you schedule a whole
five-minute MIDI file to be played,
it'll play and you won't have any
way to tell it to stop unless the
user quits your program probably.
So we suggest that you use a number, say,
100 milliseconds or so,
as a guideline of how far
in advance to schedule.
That's a short enough period
of time to be relatively
responsive if the user says stop,
but it's also far enough in
advance so that if you're talking
to a piece of hardware that's got
some latency in talking to it,
we can still have timing accuracy
in sending events to that device.
An important thing here about --
whoops -- pushing buttons here.
An important thing about
scheduling MIDI output is that
we have support for devices,
for pieces of hardware that
are capable of doing their own
scheduling and sending of MIDI.
A driver may attach a property
to its device that says,
"I want to schedule events for this
device some number of milliseconds in
advance." So you as an application writer
should check that property and see if
the driver writer has attached that
property to the device and respect it.
So if the driver is saying,
"I want my MIDI 5
milliseconds in advance,
please," then you as an application
writer can get the best timing
from the system by making sure
that your MIDI events get sent
5 milliseconds in advance or more.
We have a few timing
issues on incoming MIDI.
We timestamp it with the host
clock as soon as possible.
And to schedule your own tasks,
there's a lot of different
ways to do this in Mac OS X.
There's a number of APIs,
but we're recommending that you
use the calls in multiprocessing.h,
which is part of Carbon Core.
Those of you who are writing
MIDI drivers for your own MIDI hardware,
MIDI drivers are packaged as CFPlugins,
which are a little bit
intimidating at first glimpse.
When I first looked at it, I said,
"This looks like COM.
I'm scared." But it's not that bad.
We have some example drivers
that you can build on,
and it makes it pretty easy.
Usually,
you won't need a kernel extension,
and this is true if you're
writing a driver for a USB,
FireWire, or serial MIDI driver.
If you're writing a PCI card driver,
then you will need a kernel extension.
But usually, for USB,
in my example drivers,
I'm just a USB user client.
And these terms are familiar to those
of you who've seen the I/O Kit sessions.
And for those of you writing drivers,
I recommend you go find out more
about I/O Kit if you haven't already.
The driver programming interface from
the MIDI side of things is pretty simple.
There's just a few calls to implement.
There's one to locate your hardware.
There are calls to start and stop
communicating with your hardware.
There's a call to send some
MIDI events to your hardware.
And when you receive
incoming MIDI events,
then there's a way you can call
back into the MIDI system to
have those MIDI events delivered.
I just wanted to make a quick note
here about how having looked at
the source code for USB drivers
on OS 9 and written one on OS X,
it's an order of magnitude easier,
at least I thought so,
on OS X to write a USB driver,
and that was very encouraging.
Okay, here's a diagram that shows the
pieces of the MIDI implementation.
At the top we see your
client applications in green.
We supply a MIDI framework,
which is a client-side dynamic library.
That library communicates
with the MIDI server process.
And the reason we have that server
process is so that incoming MIDI from
some piece of hardware can be efficiently
distributed to multiple applications.
Below the MIDI server,
we see that it loads and controls
the MIDI driver plug-ins,
and those driver plug-ins
communicate with I/O Kit.
Now, you'll notice in the diagram
the horizontal gray lines.
Those indicate address space boundaries,
or different processes.
So we have the kernel and the
MIDI server and your client
applications' address spaces.
Which brings us to one of the main
performance issues in dealing with MIDI,
which is moving data between
different protected address spaces.
Now, we've got some pretty good and
fast mechanisms for doing it,
but nonetheless,
it's still important to be aware of that,
and there are some things you can
do in your program to squeeze extra
performance out of the system.
When possible,
do schedule your output a few
milliseconds in advance and look at that
property of the driver to see if it wants
to get data a little bit ahead of time.
And this will especially enable
you to send multiple MIDI events
that happen close together in time
with a single call to MIDI send.
So instead of sending
one MIDI event at a time,
if you package up just even a
few milliseconds of data at a
time with calls to MIDI send,
that will help the system
be a bit more efficient.
And we do have--I should mention--I
just wanted to say we have a dependency
on the Core OS's scheduling mechanism.
And things are good there,
but they're getting better.
Okay,
to show you that MIDI is actually up
and running on OS X to some extent,
I've got a demo set up here.
At the bottom you see I've got a
MIDI keyboard and sound module.
I've got a MIDI interface,
that blue thing, and that connects to
the computer via USB.
Over on the right there we see
the various layers of software
through which MIDI messages
travel when I run these programs.
Okay,
first I've got a simple program which
just plays a series of MIDI notes
at very regular intervals using the
scheduler built into the MIDI server.
And hopefully we'll hear that
they're very nice and regular.
[Transcript missing]
That's pretty good and regular sounding,
I think.
I've got another program here.
So here I've just got a keyboard
playing its own internal sounds.
Now I'm going to play-- I'm
going to run a program that will
take the MIDI from the keyboard,
send it to the USB interface,
to the computer,
through the whole stack of software,
back down to the interface,
and out to the sound module.
So when I play the keyboard
along-- When I play the keyboard,
I should be hearing its sound as long
as-- as well as one in the sound module.
And we shouldn't be hearing any
delays or variations in that delay.
That sounds pretty good too, I think.
I don't think the latencies
are excessive or anything.
I've got a MIDI file I really like here,
so I'm going to play
a little bit of that.
Thanks, MIDI Bing Play.
I've got one more little MIDI file
I'd like to play for you.
This time I'm also going to play along
with it a little bit using MIDI Through.
I'm not showing you what I'm actually
doing here because it's ugly.
I'm just running terminal-based
programs on OS X.
Which means I have to
remember what to type.
MIDI is real on Mac OS X.
So the next thing you're probably
wondering is how can I start to make
my applications work with MIDI on OS X?
The MIDI services are not
part of Developer Preview 4.
They've just been coming together
in the last couple of weeks.
But we are just about
ready to start seeding.
So please write to Dan Brown,
who's here in the front row.
And we've given you an
easy-to-remember email address,
audio@apple.com.
We are still holding out the
possibility of tweaking the APIs a
little bit based on your feedback
and our own release process,
but we're basically in
a mode of optimizing,
stabilizing,
and getting ready to release it as part
of the Mac OS X public beta this summer.
And I want to remind you
that it is open source.
So I hope I've given you a good
introduction to MIDI on Mac OS X,
and I'm really looking forward to
seeing your applications that use it.
Thank you.
Doug,
I'd like to bring Chris Rogers out now.
Chris has been working with
Apple for about a year and has
been doing quite a lot of work on
the QuickTime Music Architecture,
and he's also going to be discussing
some of the higher-level audio
services that we're providing to
applications developers in general.
Hi, good afternoon.
As Bill said, my name is Chris Rogers,
and I'm happy to be here to
talk to you today about music
services available on OS X.
The topics that we'll be covering today
are new synthesizer replacing the current
QuickTime Music Architecture synthesizer.
It's a DLS software synthesizer,
and we'll be discussing
that in some detail.
We'll talk about the audio unit and
MusicDevice component architecture,
how to actually hook these guys
together in different configurations,
and what that means will
become clear later on.
The sequencing services,
and the Downloadable Sounds toolbox.
So let's get on with it.
OK.
So where do music services fit in with
the rest of the Core Audio system?
The music services are higher
level services that sit both
on top of the MIDI server,
the rest of the MIDI services
that Doug just presented,
and also the audio I/O devices.
And Jeff Moore will be discussing this in
great detail in a later talk on Friday.
I really encourage you to go to that.
That would be the
Core Audio multi-channel and beyond
presentation at 2:00 on Friday.
And both of those systems
actually sit on top of I/O Kit.
And you may be interested in
how to implement audio drivers.
And there will be a talk
also on Friday about audio
family I/O Kit drivers.
So the music services--.
are available to all clients,
and also the MIDI server and the
audio/IO devices are directly
accessible by the client.
So depending on the level
of access that you require,
very low-level control,
you may just want to go right down to
the MIDI server and the IO devices,
or higher-level control,
you can talk to the MIDI services.
We're dedicated to
supporting open standards.
That includes MIDI, of course,
standard MIDI files, RMID files.
RMID files are standard MIDI files
with a DLS section in the file.
DLS stands for Downloadable Sounds.
And that's a sample bank
format where people can include
their own custom samples,
sound effects.
High-quality sample, 16-bit stereo,
if you want.
And also,
we're incorporating some of the ideas
included in MPEG-4 Structured Audio.
We're not going as far as implementing
SAIL or anything like that,
for those who know what MPEG-4 is about,
but we've incorporated some
of the better ideas in MPEG-4.
The DLS SoftSynth, this is a synthesizer,
software synthesizer that's
been completely rewritten
from scratch to replace the
synthesizer currently in QTMA.
It, among other things,
it's got a much better reverb,
several different types,
basically just sounds smoother.
And what's even better is the reverb
isn't hard-coded into the synth,
it's
It's implemented in a modular way
so that third parties can slip in
their own reverb and other effects.
We'll see how that works in a little bit.
What else is in the SoftSynth?
It has much tighter scheduling
of notes so that you don't get
this kind of slop that you might
have seen on other synthesizers.
Scheduling is sample accurate.
It is a downloadable soundsynth and
it allows for easy importation of
high-quality third-party sample banks.
So you don't necessarily have to be
stuck with cheap 8-bit sound set.
You can load in not only
general MIDI sound sets,
but arbitrary sample banks
for your own custom music.
It's a very general
sample-based synthesizer.
Envelopes are exponential as per the
downloadable sounds specification.
There's a two-pole
resonant filter in there.
Unlimited key ranges, velocity ranges,
and layers.
The layers let you actually
stack multiple samples.
When you hit the same key,
you can have individual panning and
modulation parameters on each one,
so you can get nice, fat,
rich pads that way.
And also,
DLS provides for much more flexible
modulation routing possibilities
than the old QTMA synth.
Okay, now we're going to
talk about audio units.
Now, what is an audio unit?
We're going to see in the next couple
of slides what that really means.
At its most abstract level,
it's kind of a box that
deals with audio in some way.
It would take in n audio streams
and output m audio streams.
And the number of inputs
and outputs can be variable.
In fact, you may have an audio unit that
has no inputs or no outputs.
And in at least one case,
there may be an audio unit that
has no inputs and no outputs.
And you may think, well,
what would that be?
And that would be maybe
an audio unit that...
represents an external MIDI device,
and we'll see how that can wrap up a
MIDI endpoint through the MIDI services
that Doug spoke about earlier.
There are other types of audio
units that have no inputs.
An audio unit that's representing
a hardware input device
would only have outputs,
and vice versa.
A hardware output device
would have only inputs,
and DSP processors would
typically have both inputs and
outputs for processing audio.
Some examples of DSP processing
modules would be reverb,
chorus, delay, ring modulator,
parametric EQ.
Put a stereo mixer in there.
It's not really,
probably shouldn't really
belong in that category,
but stereo mixer would be an audio
unit that takes in multiple inputs
and mixes according to volume and
pan information to stereo output.
Another type of audio unit
would be format converters
for sample rate conversion,
bit depth conversion, this type of thing.
And also codecs,
like MP3 coders and decoders.
Another type of audio unit is one which,
at high level, abstracts the notion of
a hardware input device.
That would be layered on top of
the Audio I/O Device APIs that
Jeff will be talking about on Friday.
Another audio source would
be a software synthesizer.
This is an audio unit which
is called the MusicDevice,
which supports some additional
APIs over the audio unit.
An audio destination,
that's another type of audio unit.
And that could, at a high level,
abstract the notion of a
hardware output device.
And that would be implemented in
terms of the low-level audio I/O APIs.
And also a file.
You could have an audio unit which just
writes its output directly to a file.
So this just gives you kind of
a flavor of what the range of
behavior that an audio unit can,
can exhibit.
Okay, so these individual auto units,
they're kind of interesting on their own,
but they get even more interesting
when you're able to hook them together.
In arbitrary configurations,
it was our goal to have an architecture
that lets developers connect these
modules up in arbitrary ways,
not just in linear chains like
the current sound manager can do,
and not just some kind of a
monolithic mixer architecture
with fixed send returns.
But we're going for a fully modular
approach where these audio units can
be connected in pretty sophisticated
ways to create all kinds of different
interesting high-level software.
The connections between these audio units
is represented by an AU graph object.
And there's a whole set of
APIs for dealing with AU graphs.
I'm not going to go over
too many specific APIs in my talk,
because there are so many of them,
and I'm covering so
many different topics,
actually.
With the AU graph, in essence,
it represents a set of audio
units and their connections.
Like I said,
there's a simple API to create
and connect them together,
and APIs for actually persisting the
state of the graph so that you could
save the state to a file or to memory,
and then reconstruct
the graph based on that.
Let's look a little bit at the
client API of the Audio Unit.
Audio Units have properties,
and you can get at those properties
with Audio Unit GetProperties,
SetProperty, and HasProperty.
Properties are keyed by ID,
and an ID is really just an integer.
That's all it is.
Some of our IDs are predefined,
and others can be defined by
particular implementers of audio units,
so third parties can define
their own custom properties.
Some examples of
properties would be a name,
number of inputs, so the client,
if the client is interested in
how many inputs and what kind of
data format these inputs take,
the client would call getProperty
with the appropriate ID.
Data is passed by void star and length,
so arbitrary data could be
passed back and forth between
the client and audio unit,
and third parties can pass custom
data back and forth in this way.
[Transcript missing]
Some examples of parameters are channel
gain and pan for a stereo mixer,
filter cut-off frequency,
or for that matter,
resonance in a low-pass filter,
delay time for a chorus delay effect,
and there are many others.
One of the most important things you want
to do with these audio units is actually
get access to the rendered audio coming
out of one of the audio output streams.
And the Audio Unit Render
call is used for this.
The client passes in timestamping
information for when the audio buffer
is to be presented in the audio stream.
The audio is also rendered
for a specific output.
So if an audio unit has, say,
four different outputs,
Audio Unit Render would
be called four times,
once for each output.
In the internal implementation
of an audio unit,
in order to do signal processing,
like say a low-pass filter,
how does the audio unit actually read
its input in order to do the processing
and then pass the results back to the
client who calls Audio Unit Render?
Well, the audio unit actually reads its
input by calling Audio Unit Render
on another audio unit,
which provides its input.
And the audio unit
knows which one that is,
which is its source,
because a connection has been
established for it ahead of time.
Okay.
I'm going to talk about the
two-phase schedule render model.
On the bottom of this diagram,
you'll see there's a timeline.
Time is progressing from left to right.
And this is representing an audio stream
for a particular output of an audio unit.
And we see that the audio
stream is divided into,
well in this diagram,
there's three different time slices.
But conceptually,
you can imagine an audio stream being
divided up into many different small
time slices for which processing occurs.
So first of all, for each time slice,
events are scheduled.
Time, very specific.
Timestamping information is
provided for these events.
And secondly, the audio is rendered
for each of the outputs.
So, for instance, in the first phase,
if this is a software synthesizer,
all note events which apply for
this given time slice are scheduled,
and then the audio is rendered.
The MusicDevice is actually an
audio unit which extends upon the
audio unit APIs with additional
APIs that are specific to synthesis.
And the MusicDevice also replaces
the note allocator and music
component that currently exist
in QuickTime Music Architecture.
What kind of additional APIs does
the MusicDevice support?
Mainly,
the APIs center around scheduling notes,
when notes start and when notes stop.
The first protocol that's used
is just the MIDI protocol,
which everybody's familiar with.
And all music devices would be
expected to support this protocol.
The second protocol is
an extended protocol,
which allows for variable
argument node instantiation.
What does that mean, really?
In the MIDI protocol,
There's only two bits of information
which are provided for a note on event.
That is a note number and a velocity.
So which note on the keyboard is it,
and how hard did you hit it?
But,
That may be insufficient for certain
types of more complex instruments.
And there may be certain interesting
applications where more information could
be provided for a note instantiation.
For instance,
where to position a note in 3D space.
So additional information can be
provided in this variable argument,
note instantiation.
Another example would be in a physical
modeling synthesizer of a drum.
For anybody who's actually
played a hand drum,
they know how subtle changes in
the position and how hard you
hit it and how flat your palm is.
Or if you hit it with
the tip of your fingers,
it makes very subtle changes in the
resonances that come out of the drum.
The sound completely changes
and the character of the tone.
So this type of information
could be passed in the variable
argument note instantiation.
instantiation.
This extended protocol also supports
more than 16 MIDI channels and
more than 128 controller messages.
Music sequencing services.
We're moving on to a
different topic here.
This represents a whole
other set of APIs,
which, once again,
I'm not able to go through in detail
because there are so many of them,
and I only have limited time to talk.
But essentially,
this is a set of APIs for constructing
and editing multitrack sequences,
whether they're MIDI sequences
or using this extended protocol.
There's also a runtime for the
real-time playback of these sequences,
and that's otherwise
known as a sequencer.
The events themselves can be,
like I said, MIDI events.
They can be in the extended format,
and there can also be user events,
which have user-defined data in them.
And that's up to the developer
to decide how to use.
The events actually address audio units
and music devices and external MIDI gear
through MIDI endpoints and directly
through a music device encapsulation.
So what can we do with these sequences?
I've already shown previously
a slide where there are these
audio units connected together
in arbitrary configurations.
And here we have three audio units.
So, you know, we have one and two
feeding into the third one.
And off to the side here we see
a sequence that has three tracks.
And events from track one are
addressing audio unit one.
Track two is addressing number two.
And track three is addressing
audio unit number three.
The yellow,
the thick yellow arrows represent
the flow of audio through the system.
And these blue lines,
these thin blue lines
represent control information,
scheduling information being
supplied to the audio units.
And if you remember back to the
render schedule diagram that
I had a few slides earlier,
you'll see that the sequence is actually
providing the schedule part of this,
and the render part is
actually being pulled through
by the audio units themselves.
Thank you.
Here are some features that the
sequencing services provide.
Just basic cut, copy, paste, merge,
replace, as you would expect in
a sequencer application.
Once again,
this does not supply any user interface.
This is just the low-level engine
which will perform this editing.
So you just slap a UI on top
of this and you're ready to go.
Tracks.
Oh yeah, also,
these edits can be done live
while the sequence is playing,
so there's no difficulty there.
Each track in a sequence can
have attributes like mute,
solo, and looping attributes.
So you can have
and I will be joined by a track
which is actually looping over
and over again on the same events.
And the loop time is of course
completely configurable.
The sequencing services could be
used as a core sequencing engine
for a sequencing application.
So one of the most difficult things
in a sequencing application is
to write this sequencing engine.
Not that writing user
interface code is easy,
but at least this much work is done,
so this is an opportunity for developers
to leverage our technology here.
The scheduling uses units of
beats in floating-point formats.
There's an implicit tempo
map in the sequence,
and the sequence format is persistent.
It can be saved either as a
standard MIDI file format or a
new data format in QuickTime,
which we're in the process of defining.
And we welcome your input there as well.
Okay,
now I'm going to show you a demonstration
using these sequencing services.
It's actually a simple
little C program I wrote.
It's just one or two pages long.
And it's just basically calling
into these sequencing APIs.
It's not meant to be
a musical composition.
Just kind of a basic run-through
of what the sequencer can do.
What you're going to hear is a cycling
through of general MIDI percussion,
and after a while you'll hear
a resonant filter come in,
with the filter sweeping through,
back and forth,
and on top of that you'll hear
and I implemented this by actually
connecting the DLS SoftSynth,
which is an audio unit,
I created a resonant filter,
and following the resonant filter,
I put an amplitude modulator audio unit.
And then I created a sequence
[Transcript missing]
I realize it's kind of
echo-y in this place,
so please bear with me.
Hope you can get the
gist of what I'm doing.
This is just a simple example.
It's a C program,
one or two pages of code,
something I slapped
together pretty quick.
Didn't have any user interface
available to me to author
anything more interesting,
but you can imagine if you had a
more complicated setup of audio
units representing a number of
different kinds of processing units,
reverbs and delays and so on,
you could get quite a lot more
interesting set of effects.
You gotta kinda wait until we have more
of a library of audio units built up.
Let's see.
Where did I leave my little remote?
Okay,
now we're going to move on to talking
about the Downloadable Sounds toolbox.
Once again, this represents a whole set
of APIs which I don't have
time to go over individually,
but I can talk about at a broad level.
Downloadable Sounds is both
a sample bank data format and
it's a sample-based synth model.
The toolbox provides for reading
and writing DLS Level 2 files and
creating arbitrary DLS instruments.
It could be used as a foundation
for a really nice custom instrument
editor application so that users
can drag in their own samples,
apply envelopes and LFOs,
and panning and layering and so on.
So this is a really good
opportunity for third parties.
This format also replaces
QuickTime Music Architecture Atomic
Instruments format.
At the top level,
the DLS toolbox uses a number
of objects in its APIs.
The DLS collection is at the top.
The collection references
a number of instruments.
Instruments represent --
reference a number of regions.
And the collection also references
the wave data as DLS wave objects.
A DLS collection
contains a set of instruments, as I said.
It references the WAVE data,
and it also includes
text-based information.
It could include copyright information,
the name of the collection, author,
comments, any kind of tagged text that
a user wants to put in there.
An instrument is assigned to a
particular MIDI bank and program member,
and contains a set of regions.
and also some articulation parameters:
low frequency oscillators, envelopes,
etc.
and also contains text information
like the collection does.
DLS region actually references
the sample data that's going to be
played and contains the loop points
and defines where in the key range,
where on the keyboard the sample
will play and in what velocity range.
And like I said, these regions can be
stacked for layering.
And also,
these regions can contain articulation
information like envelopes and LFOs,
which would override those
found in the instrument.
and text information.
The DLS Wave object contains
the actual sample data and the
sample format for that data.
And the DLS articulations object.
That's what actually contains the LFOs,
the envelopes, the reverb send level,
and all the other modulation
information panning.
And these objects can be
attached to the DLS regions or
the DLS instruments as we saw.
And there's a simple set of APIs for
accessing and setting the relevant
information in each one of these
objects and connecting them together.
And it's really a lot easier
to use this API than to try
to create a DLS collection by
doing a low-level byte munging,
believe me.
Backwards compatibility.
I want to say that we
are supporting the old
QuickTime Music Architecture components.
They have been reimplemented.
The Node Allocator and
the Music component,
the old software synth,
have been reimplemented on top
of all of this new technology,
but we are deprecating the
APIs for these components.
They continue to work,
but we are really encouraging
developers to move over to the new
Audio Unit Music Device APIs and
the Sequencing Service APIs.
I would want to wrap up
my presentation here,
and I guess we can move on
to Q&A session with Bill.
Thanks for giving me time,
and I hope you'll all find
a use for Music Services.
Just before we actually
get started on the Q&A,
I'd like to say that the synthesizer
that's in QuickTime on the
OS X disks that you have on DP4
is actually the new synthesizer.
We haven't publicized the APIs yet
as we're still actually going
through review stages for those APIs.
But the sample set that's on the
DP4 CD is an 8-bit sample set.
It's the same sample set that
the current QTMA engine uses.
But the actual synthesizer,
synthesis engine itself is the
new MusicDevice components that
Chris has been talking about today.
And that'll be available for
seeding a little bit later as
Doug discussed in his talk as well.
If you send email to audio@apple.com,
you'll get a link to the audio.
You'll be able to get access
to seeding information.
We'll be setting up seeding lists.